Welcome.
Thank you.
We are in public session for our hearing with Education Payroll.
Welcome to the committee. We've heard from you before, but there's probably new
members and new members of your team, so please do introduce yourselves.
We'll have a short introduction from you, a couple of minutes, highlight
anything you'd like to draw our attention to, and then we'll open for questions.
Over to you.
Thank you very much. Thank you for
giving us the opportunity to be here with you today.
I will just start with some introductions. So I'm Naomi Ferguson.
I am the chair of the board of Education Payroll Limited.
This is Lara Ariel, who is our chief executive, and
Gerard Aberdeen, who is the hotu digital and technology.
Just a reminder, our purpose is quite simply to ensure that the
teachers and support staff in New Zealand state schools
are paid on time and the right amount.
In 2024-25, we made some 2.7
million payments to 102,000 teachers and support staff,
totaling $7.7 billion each year. So
we're quite a small organization, but the work that we do is really important
and the throughput is significant.
So effectively, we think we have two categories of work.
One is supporting the delivery of that payroll,
and that's our core service. And we also, of course, maintain the
payroll technology that allows us to ensure that
that payroll is delivered and within there to
support the customization that's required
in order to meet the education sector collectives.
In terms of our performance for the year, it's there in the annual report.
There are just two areas of improvement that I'd like to highlight.
Our customer satisfaction reached
87.43%, which is the highest level since
2016, and I'm pleased to say that's continued through into this year.
Mm-hmm.
And we also made a significant improvement to our
performance with regard to salary assessment.
If you will remember, 2023-24, we had some
significant challenges in that area.
We were able to recover that. And last year, whilst we
didn't meet the 100% target, we achieved 99.34.
So
got that back on track, basically, for our teachers and school
administrators.
There are some measures that still continue to be challenging, for example,
overpayments.
And as I've explained before, some of those are not actually very good
measures of EPL's performance. We don't control some of the
levers to manage overpayments. They're controlled by the ministry or by schools.
So we continue to push the ministry on two aspects to
that. Firstly, ensuring that collectively we do pull the
levers that can be pulled. And secondly, thinking about
refining the measures so that they more accurately reflect EPL's
performance and that that can be seen clearly.
We've continued to implement changes that came through as a result
of earlier collective bargaining,
and have been able to do that. Though, as I've
previously advised the committee,
our current core payroll system
in the payroll engine is aging.
And we have signaled through to the ministry and ministers
that we believe it is time to start to plan
for an upgrade to that core system.
It continues to increase in risk as it gets
older and the costs of maintaining it and making changes will only
increase. So we're working with the ministry to explore the options to
upgrade that core. We won't be replacing EdPay, which
is the front-end system that our school administrators and
principals use, the subject of investment from around
2016, and it's really contributed to that level of
customer satisfaction and comfort.
So it's about rewiring the house behind the scenes.
Kitchen stays in place, meals get delivered as they're expected to,
but a bit of rewiring needed, and we're working through those options.
And you'll see some of that when you see our 2025-26
annual report and the work we're doing in that space.
I'd just like to finish by thanking those that actually make the
payroll happen. That's the staff at EPL,
and it's also the school administrators and principals.
And collectively, they deal with all the things that come up in people's lives,
all of the changes that are needed, all of the implementations of
collectives and ensuring that we've got the right information, and we could not do
the job we do without them all. So I would just like on record to have that
thanks to them noted.
Finally, that's all I wanted to say.
Look forward to answering your questions.
Thank you for the time to make a few comments.
Wonderful, and thank you for the introduction.
We have our first question from Lawrence Wan.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you so much for coming.
You kind of touched on what I was going to ask anyway.
I want to check in terms of any of the new system you're developing, because we
know there are some issues a few years ago with holiday pay and all of those.
Mm-hmm. Mm-hmm.
How would EdPay address the increasing complexity,
both in terms of where the funding comes from, the fact that schools themselves
are funded differently than they report to you, and you have to administer
the payment itself out to different people.
People have different start and end date.
Permanent teachers are usually very structured, but if you have
potential changes, let's say, with support staff or teacher aides that are attached
to a student through ORS funding-
Mm-hmm
... how do you track the complexity, particularly when it comes to support staff
payment?
Yeah. So I guess our role in the system is simply to take the
information from schools and then calculate
the correct amount of pay and ensure it's paid.
So some of the work, for example, with regard to
Holidays Act compliance, that's actually being run by
the ministry as a project to correct all of that, and then
they'll simply send us a file with the adjustments that need to be made
to the pay run.
So we have, in some ways, quite a narrow role in that
whole system.
And a lot of the engagement with schools in relation to something like holiday pay
is actually through the ministry. I'm not sure if that's helping.
Yeah, and I guess also,
in terms of the administration component of it, when you do
pay for the staff, and this might be quite a basic question.
I want to check, do you also deal with things like subsidies and et
cetera as well? Or that also goes through the school?
No. If it's a payroll subsidy,
one that's being paid as rather-
An allowance
... an allowance.
An allowance.
Yes.
So like fuel subsidies-
Yes
... and et cetera.
Yes. So we made the changes to
the recent fuel allowance. Yeah.
Okay.
Right. Next question from Pam Sheet Palmer.
Oh, you didn't... Okay. That's right. Vanessa Winning.
Okay. Thank you very much. So
you've signaled some potential risk-
Mm-hmm
... in terms of the
systems that you-
Mm-hmm
... use.
Mm-hmm.
What are those risks and
what kind of level
of risk are we talking about? What's the urgency behind those
changes?
So we have a core engine that is
now
15 years old, I think. Effectively, implemented in
2012. So it's starting to age.
Mm-hmm.
It is also heavily customized because of the
nature of schools' payroll. And so what we are seeing
and what we are signaling is both because of that aging and because of the level of
complexity that's there,
and the level of our skill to be able to maintain that, then
there are risks.
It's urgent in the sense that we know that to
change it will take a period of
five to seven years. You need to plan these things.
Mm-hmm.
There's a lot of work you want to do before you start to make the changes.
Then you will
.
So against that, it's urgent that we are doing the work that we're doing
now. This year, for example, we've done a proof of concept to help develop
what that pathway forward is.
Because over that period, that risk would become more pertinent.
At the moment, we have a lot of good
control in place to manage those risks, but
they will continue to, the older the system gets, the riskier it
gets.
So it sounds as though you're already planning for potential
changes and-
Yes
... doing the work-
... of the change management process.
So you're not waiting for it to-
No
... all collapse before-
Absolutely not.
Good.
Absolutely not. Good. That's reassuring. Thank you.
So we've been doing work this year, as I say, on a proof of concept, on an
indicative business case, and developing that through to go through
processes with the shareholding ministers and with the
ministry around replacing it. As I say, it is about thinking
about replacing that back-end core, that investment in the front end will
also help us with change management going forward.
As we remember,
whenever we last changed this, the
changes really impacted school administrators.
Their jobs-
Mm-hmm
... were quite, they had to learn quite a lot of new stuff.
And that was part of the challenge with what was going on.
Our plan is to replace that behind the scenes and keep
their processes very much as they are.
Mm-hmm.
On that, you mentioned that in your introductory, and just to build on this
point.
Mm-hmm.
Is it necessary for you to change the front end and you're just not because-
No
... that's sort of set in the way of-
Yeah
... the system working?
No, we don't. That was put in in 2016.
Yeah.
It's working really well.
Great. Okay.
It's an investment the government has already paid for.
We want to sweat that asset.
Great, yeah. Just trying to confirm that you're not-
No
... doing the back-end rewiring to try and cover for-
... the front-end stuff-
No
... not able to be changed.
It's actually that the front end allows us to do the rewiring-
Great
... without triggering some of the change management issues that could be present
if we
had to also think about that.
Okay.
Next question from Lawrence.
Thank you, Madam Chair. I've got two questions, and this relates to your
annual report, and I want to pick up on pages
seven and eight.
I'm going to start out with a question on seven.
This is to do with the cost of schools' payroll service per school
employee paid.
Mm-hmm.
Can I just check, is that the cost to...
First question, cost to EdPay, how much it is, or this is how
much the school are paying you?
No, it's the cost, it's our operating cost.
It's your operating cost.
Schools don't pay us.
Okay, cool. Just checking, just for that clarification.
Yeah.
Changes from 2024 to 2025, that's not
simply a CPI adjustment. That's a 30% increase
from 250 to 328.
But you mentioned it hasn't been adjusted since 2016, but the actual
cost in 2023, 2024 was even higher at 344.
Could you just walk the select committee through on-
Yeah, sure
... that number?
So the middle column is actually the performance standard.
Okay.
So that was set in the Master Services Agreement in
2016/17 between the
ministry and Education Payroll Limited.So that's our
target, if you like.
Yeah.
It hasn't been adjusted by CPI.
Okay.
If it was, then it would be more like 330.
So that's an actual figure that was set-
Yeah
... in the performance agreement in 2016-
... not adjusted. In 2023/24, our
costs were the 344, and actually in
24/25 we were able to reduce those to 328.
And
with that then, is that the intention with any kind of master
agreement that they're now going to be a more flexible rather than a this is the
exact amount, that there's going to be a more of a flexible amount that
can be adjusted with CPI?
We're looking to the Master Services Agreement
is up for renewal ahead of the
'27 year, and I think we're looking to do a couple of things in there.
One, to again think about actually what's the appropriate way
to
benchmark our costs or have a cost that is benchmarkable.
EPL do some functions that in many
organizations would actually be functions of an HR department.
Because schools don't have an HR department-
Mm-hmm
... we kind of cover that ground. So we may look at the format of it,
but I think the other thing is to look at it being adjusted for CPI
because after 10 years, it's
pretty meaningless if you've had the same figure in place
over that period.
Madam Chair, that's okay, if I can continue.
So then my next question is on page eight when it comes to overpayment.
Mm-hmm.
I'm particularly interested in point A when you're talking about some of
them you have been working with
ministry to write off some of the-
Mm-hmm
... bad debt or aged debt.
But you also mentioned of the 3.1 million currently that is
overpayment debt, 1.7 is from the ministry.
For the 1.4 that's from the school's Ops fund-
Mm-hmm
... are you able to, working with schools, to write off some of the aged debt or
the 1.4 million is do schools still have to find some way
of paying it off via the Ops fund?
One, two. We are working with-
Okay
... the Office of the Auditor General who does the school audit work.
Yeah.
Because that debt will sit on each
individual school's balance sheet.
Yeah.
So, it's a matter of working with schools and their boards to
be able to go through a process of writing that debt off.
Okay.
Yeah.
And sorry, final question on this, Madam Chair.
For both the ministry,
the overpayment debt, and also for school overpayment payment debt, what are the
main reason that
that debt existed and that you have the aged debt in the first place?
One, two.
So we track
payroll errors and make sure that we know what the source of those errors are.
Sometimes that will be information that is incorrectly
provided by schools, or it might be that we get late
advice of a termination or a change to someone's employment conditions.
So that can create
payments.
So there's errors on behalf of our payroll advisors.
I guess from our perspective,
we need to have a process in place to quickly identify where payroll
errors have been made because the sooner we identify them, the
easier it is to correct them.
Yeah.
And you can contact the employee and then go through the appropriate
process to have that debt repaid.
Yeah.
Once it gets old, it's much harder to recover.
Mm-hmm.
And
we have to go through quite a structured process
with the school and with their employees to ensure that we can
work that through. So it's really critical that education payroll, from our
perspective, is onto those overpayments really
quickly, and that's the bit that we can control.
Cool. And I think your
point nine also lays out really clearly the proportionality of
the aged debt.
Yeah.
So that's very helpful to know that figure. Thank you.
Thank you.
It's just a curiosity question from me because-
Yeah
... we've got Gerard here from technology company.
He's ours.
Yeah? Okay. So you're internal?
Yes.
Right. That just says here, Hotu Digital and Technology-
That's just your-
.. assumes a separate business
... description.
Right.
Your title.
Okay. So can I just ask, in terms of the technical
capability, you've talked about obviously the front end's been in since 2016.
What requirement
does the interface schools, the administrative staff within schools and
education payroll in terms of ongoing training and support when there's staff
turnover and input to the system and things like that?
So you're thinking in terms of our role with school administrators-
Yeah
... to help them keep up to date with changes?
Yep.
There is a-
Oh, and sorry, and in reverse, changes within faculty
within schools and their training requirements.
Mm-hmm.
Not necessarily changes you're making.
Okay.
So we do have
regular engagement into schools in the form of newsletters and things where we
are providing information that way through.
Changes that would happen at their perspective, we would be
told via the ministry really.
Yep.
So they're the bridge from us to schools.
So if there are changes to curriculum that then change
alliances, the ministry will let us know that in
time for us to code it in.
Yeah.
Sorry. And to perhaps reclarify, I think what I'm trying to ascertain
is, is there a portion of the work within your team, both
technically and non-technically, in terms of engagement with new
staff, training them or are they doing that internally at a school level
when there's new onboarding person that's having to deal with that interface that
you're talking about, that front of house?
It would be dealt with by the school.
Yeah.
But again, there's
products that we have in terms of
newsletters and things that could be helped.
And then a lot of our frontline staff, we have
a number of people who are the engagement point for a school administrator if
they've got a query or if they're struggling.
Yeah. Great.
And a lot of that would be help and assistance and-
Bit of a help desk.
We have on our website for a new school administrator-
Mm-hmm
... we have quite a
good
structure to support people when they need to be onboarded.
Yeah.
And then we have school account administrators-
Right
... who they can call that can guide them through.
Right.
But what's on the website is quite comprehensive and supports them again.
So effectively, you made a very efficient digitized system
that allows someone to onboard at any time of the-
Yes
... school cycle.
Yes.
Wonderful.
Yeah.
Great. Well, we've exhausted our list of questions, so there we go.
Thank you very much for making yourselves available for us today.
Absolutely.
And if there's any follow-up questions from the committee, you'll hear from our
secretariat. But really appreciate your time
today.
Thank you.
We appreciate your support.
Thanks.